Practical No. 10 on validating map data. 
Step 1: Structural Data Checks (in Excel)

Open the File: Open the kenyel_epidemiological_data file in Excel.

Find Duplicates:

Select the 

child id column.

Go to the 

Home tab → Conditional Formatting → Highlight Cells Rules → Duplicate Values to see duplicate entries.


Remove Duplicates: Select all the data, go to the Data tab, and click Remove Duplicates.

Code Variables:

Select the 

sex column.

Press Ctrl+F to open Find and Replace. Replace all instances of 

M with 1 and F with 2.

Step 2: Verifying Data Plausibility (in Excel)

Create a Scatter Plot: Select the age column, go to the Insert tab, and choose Scatter to visualize the data distribution.

Filter for Outliers:

Go to the 

Home tab and select Sort & Filter → Filter to add filter dropdowns to each column header.

Click the filter on the age column and select Number Filters → Greater Than…. Enter 

20 to find ages that are outside the expected range.

Step 3: Logical Data Checks (in Excel)
Create a Pivot Table:

Go to the 

Insert tab and select PivotTable.

Drag 

stool into the Rows area and one of the infection status columns (e.g., sth_inf) into both the Columns and Values areas.

Change the Value Field Settings for the value from 'Sum' to 

Count to cross-tabulate the data.

Use a Formula Check:

Create a new column named 

check.

In the first cell of the column, enter the formula: 

=IF(AND(H2=0, NOT(P2="")),1,0).


Copy this formula down for all rows. This checks for logical inconsistencies.

Use the filter on the 

check column to show only rows with a value of 1, which represent potential errors.

Step 4: Verifying Coordinates (in QGIS)

Start a New Project: Open QGIS and create a new project.


Add Vector Layer: Add the Kenya_admin.shp file to the project.

Add Delimited Text Layer:

Navigate to 

Layer → Add Layer → Add Delimited Text Layer.

Select the 

Kenya_school_location.csv file.

In the 

Geometry Definition section, ensure the coordinate system (CRS) is set to WGS84.

Add the layer to see if the school locations align correctly with the admin boundary map.


Sources






